README.md, before:

# Seeking Playground

Arcade + PyTorch experimentation environment for building and testing 2D reinforcement learning ideas. The project keeps the game/simulation code separated from the learning stack so that you can prototype new policies or drop in alternative algorithms without rewriting the world logic.

## Features

- **Arcade visualization** for interactive play (WASD/arrow keys + reset hotkey).
- **Headless PyTorch trainer** that can run as fast as possible without rendering.
- **Modular layout** that separates environment definition, agents, and RL utilities.
- **Standalone Pygame Pong** mini-game for quick keyboard battles.
- **Configurable gridworld** (size, obstacles, penalties, rewards, seeds).
- **Packaging ready** with `pyproject.toml` + optional editable install for IDE support.

## Project layout

```
seeking/
├── pyproject.toml          # package metadata + dependencies
├── requirements.txt        # quick installation list
└── src/seeking
    ├── config.py           # dataclass configuring the gridworld
    ├── game/
    │   ├── world.py        # environment + Gym-style API
    │   └── arcade_runner.py# Arcade window for human control
    ├── rl/
    │   ├── policy.py       # PyTorch policy network helpers
    │   └── trainer.py      # REINFORCE-style training loop
    ├── agents/             # reference agents (random baseline)
    └── main.py             # CLI entry point
```

## Prerequisites

- Python 3.10+
- macOS / Linux windowing stack for Arcade (headless training does not require a GUI).

## Environment setup

All commands run from the repository root.

1. Create and activate a virtual environment.

   ```bash
   python3 -m venv .venv
   source .venv/bin/activate
   ```

   On Windows PowerShell: `.\.venv\Scripts\Activate.ps1`

2. Upgrade pip and install dependencies (editable install keeps imports tidy).

   ```bash
   pip install --upgrade pip
   pip install -e .
   ```

   Alternatively, `pip install -r requirements.txt` if you do not need an editable install.

3. Verify Arcade can open a window (skip this if you only care about headless training):

   ```bash
   python -c "import arcade; print(arcade.__version__)"
   ```

## Usage

### Interactive play

Open the Arcade window and control the agent with arrow keys / WASD. Press `R` to reset the level.

```bash
python -m seeking.main --mode play --width 12 --height 12 --obstacles 15
```

### Headless training

Runs a simple REINFORCE trainer implemented in `seeking.rl.trainer.Trainer`. All Torch operations happen without Arcade, so this mode is suitable for running on servers without display support.

```bash
python -m seeking.main --mode train --episodes 200 --lr 5e-4 --gamma 0.95 --seed 123
```

Logs are printed through `rich` every few episodes. Edit `Trainer` to plug in advanced algorithms, value heads, replay buffers, etc. The environment exposes normalized observations (`np.float32`), discrete actions, and convenience helpers for sampling and rendering.

### Pygame Pong

Launch a local Pong battle powered by Pygame. The left paddle uses `W`/`A` to move up and `S`/`D` to move down. The right paddle uses the arrow keys (Up/Left = up, Down/Right = down). Tap `SPACE` to pause/resume, and press `Q` (or close the window) to exit. The ball starts white, takes on the color of the last paddle hit, and scores are shown as `LEFT: N    RIGHT: M`.

```bash
python -m seeking.main --mode pong
```

On boot you'll see a simple in-game menu: press `1` for classic two-player, `2` for human vs AI (right paddle tracks with the current checkpoint), or `3` for AI vs AI. Use the left/right arrows on the menu to cycle the projectile between a ball, square, or triangle—your choice is shown at the top during gameplay. When you choose AI vs AI and close the window, the paddle with the higher score overwrites both checkpoints so the reigning champion is used next time. Press `ESC` to open the pause overlay where you can resume or jump back to the main menu (returning from AI vs AI through this menu will also promote the current winner before showing the menu). By default the human/AI modes look for checkpoints under `runs/green_<shape>.pt` and `runs/purple_<shape>.pt` where `<shape>` is `circle`, `square`, or `triangle`; create those files via `--pong-train`/`--pong-competition` or point the CLI flags elsewhere (`--pong-green-shape`, `--pong-purple-shape`).

#### Training the Pong agent

Flip on the `--pong-train` flag to launch a lightweight REINFORCE trainer that builds a four-layer feed-forward network with two hidden layers (64 and 32 units with ReLU). The model ingests a normalized `(6,)` state vector containing your paddle's top/bottom, the opponent paddle's top/bottom, the current score differential, and the ball's vertical position, and emits unnormalized logits for the two discrete actions (`move_up`, `move_down`). The trainer can run on CPU or GPU (set via `--device`) and saves a standard `state_dict` when `--pong-checkpoint` is provided.

Quick start:

```bash
python -m seeking.main --mode pong --pong-train
```

```bash
python -m seeking.main --mode pong --pong-train --episodes 500 --lr 5e-4 --pong-train-shape square --pong-checkpoint runs/policy_square.pt
```

The saved checkpoint can later be loaded with `torch.load` or plugged into `PongPolicyNetwork.load_state_dict` for experimentation.

To watch the trained policy inside the UI, load the checkpoint with the new demo flag (use `--pong-run-shape` to pick the projectile used during playback):

```bash
python -m seeking.main --mode pong --pong-demo runs/policy_square.pt --pong-run-shape triangle
```

You can also chain training and playback in one go:

```bash
python -m seeking.main --mode pong --pong-train --episodes 500 --pong-train-shape square --pong-checkpoint runs/policy_square.pt --pong-demo runs/policy_square.pt --pong-run-shape triangle
```

Shape-specific AIs: pass `--pong-train-shape square` (or `triangle`) to produce a checkpoint like `runs/policy_square.pt`, and use `--pong-green-shape` / `--pong-purple-shape` to point the UI or competition flow at different shapes when two AIs battle.

#### Competitive loop (train → battle → promote)

If you want both paddles to keep improving through sparring, use the competition flag. Each invocation trains separate green/purple policies, launches a battle UI so they can fight it out, and then copies the winner into both checkpoints before exiting. The next time you run the command, training resumes from the reigning champion.

```bash
python -m seeking.main --mode pong --pong-competition --episodes 500 --pong-green-shape ball --pong-purple-shape square --pong-run-shape triangle
```

Close the UI when you are satisfied with the battle; the score at that moment determines the winner.

Pass `--pong-green-shape` / `--pong-purple-shape` (and rely on the default `runs/green_<shape>.pt` naming, e.g., `green_circle.pt`) to pit differently trained agents against one another, e.g., triangle-vs-square checkpoints.

## Apple Silicon (M1/M2) GPU usage

PyTorch can leverage the Apple GPU via Metal Performance Shaders (MPS). If you installed a recent `torch` wheel, just pass `--device mps` (or set `TORCH_DEVICE=mps`) when running any training command:

```bash
python -m seeking.main --mode pong --pong-train --device mps
```

If you want training/battle commands to automatically attempt the MPS device, we include a helper flag: add `--device auto` and the CLI will try `cuda`, then `mps`, and finally fall back to `cpu`. Use it like so:

```bash
python -m seeking.main --mode pong --device auto --pong-train --pong-train-shape triangle
```

Ensure you have at least Python 3.10 and the official PyTorch builds for macOS arm64 installed.。

E.g.

```bash
python -m seeking.main --mode pong --pong-competition --episodes 500 --pong-green-checkpoint runs/green_circle.pt --pong-purple-checkpoint runs/purple_circle.pt --pong-purple-shape triangle --pong-green-shape triangle --pong-run-shape triangle
```

#### Self-play training inside the UI

To watch two reinforcement learning agents learn directly in the rendered Pong match, start the new self-play mode. Both paddles run identical four-layer feed-forward policies (6 inputs → 64 → 32 → 2) and receive symmetric on-screen rewards (track ball alignment, bounces, and scoring). Parameters such as `--lr`, `--gamma`, `--device`, and `--episodes` still apply, though the self-play loop trains continuously until you quit.

```bash
python -m seeking.main --mode pong --pong-selfplay --lr 1e-3 --gamma 0.99
```

Use `SPACE` to pause/resume and `Q` (or closing the window) to stop the session.

Each time you exit self-play, the latest weights and optimizer state are saved (by default to `pong_selfplay_state.pt`) and automatically reloaded the next time you launch the command. Customize the location with `--pong-selfplay-checkpoint /path/to/file.pt`.

### Running with custom code

Because the project is installed in editable mode, you can import the modules directly:

```python
from seeking.config import GridWorldConfig
from seeking.game.world import GridWor
from seeking.rl.policy import PolicyNetwork
```

This makes it straightforward to embed the environment inside Jupyter notebooks or separate research scripts.

## Extending the playground

- Swap out `GridWorld` for another environment by adding a new module under `seeking/game`.
- Plug in different action or observation spaces by adjusting the dataclass in `config.py`.
- Add agents (scripted policies, planners, etc.) under `seeking/agents` so you can benchmark RL results.
- When training in the cloud, start the CLI with `--mode train --device cuda` to leverage GPUs if available.

## Troubleshooting

- **Arcade cannot open a window**: ensure you run it locally with display access. For SSH sessions, forward X11 or rely on headless training mode.
- **Torch missing CUDA**: specify `--device cpu` if your Python build does not ship GPU support.
- **Dependencies in global Python**: double-check that the virtual environment is activated before installing packages.

Commit message:

web sockets are successfully getting data

README.md, after:

# Seeking Playground

Arcade + PyTorch experimentation environment for building and testing 2D reinforcement learning ideas. The project keeps the game/simulation code separated from the learning stack so that you can prototype new policies or drop in alternative algorithms without rewriting the world logic.

## Features

- **Arcade visualization** for interactive play (WASD/arrow keys + reset hotkey).
- **Headless PyTorch trainer** that can run as fast as possible without rendering.
- **Modular layout** that separates environment definition, agents, and RL utilities.
- **Standalone Pygame Pong** mini-game for quick keyboard battles.
- **Configurable gridworld** (size, obstacles, penalties, rewards, seeds).
- **Packaging ready** with `pyproject.toml` + optional editable install for IDE support.

## Project layout

```
seeking/
├── pyproject.toml          # package metadata + dependencies
├── requirements.txt        # quick installation list
└── src/seeking
    ├── config.py           # dataclass configuring the gridworld
    ├── game/
    │   ├── world.py        # environment + Gym-style API
    │   └── arcade_runner.py# Arcade window for human control
    ├── rl/
    │   ├── policy.py       # PyTorch policy network helpers
    │   └── trainer.py      # REINFORCE-style training loop
    ├── agents/             # reference agents (random baseline)
    └── main.py             # CLI entry point
```

## Prerequisites

- Python 3.10+
- macOS / Linux windowing stack for Arcade (headless training does not require a GUI).

## Environment setup

All commands run from the repository root.

1. Create and activate a virtual environment.

   ```bash
   python3 -m venv .venv
   source .venv/bin/activate
   ```
   
2. Upgrade pip and install dependencies (editable install keeps imports tidy).

   ```bash
   pip install --upgrade pip
   pip install -e .
   ```

   Alternatively, `pip install -r requirements.txt` if you do not need an editable install.

3. Verify Arcade can open a window (skip this if you only care about headless training):

   ```bash
   python -c "import arcade; print(arcade.__version__)"
   ```

## Usage

### Interactive play

Open the Arcade window and control the agent with arrow keys / WASD. Press `R` to reset the level.

```bash
python -m seeking.main --mode play --width 12 --height 12 --obstacles 15
```

### Headless training

Runs a simple REINFORCE trainer implemented in `seeking.rl.trainer.Trainer`. All Torch operations happen without Arcade, so this mode is suitable for running on servers without display support.

```bash
python -m seeking.main --mode train --episodes 200 --lr 5e-4 --gamma 0.95 --seed 123
```

Logs are printed through `rich` every few episodes. Edit `Trainer` to plug in advanced algorithms, value heads, replay buffers, etc. The environment exposes normalized observations (`np.float32`), discrete actions, and convenience helpers for sampling and rendering.

### WebSocket streaming backend

Frontend experiments can stream gameplay data to a lightweight FastAPI server. The backend simply logs each message so you can confirm what the UI is sending before hooking it up to real models.

1. Install the dependencies (if you have already run `pip install -e .`, FastAPI and Uvicorn are included).
2. Start the server:

   ```bash
   uvicorn seeking.server.websocket_server:app --reload --host 0.0.0.0 --port 8000
   ```

3. Connect from the frontend via `ws://localhost:8000/ws/game` and send JSON/text frames. Every payload is printed to the terminal along with the client address.

A minimal browser snippet looks like:

```js
const ws = new WebSocket("ws://localhost:8000/ws/game");
ws.onopen = () => {
  ws.send(JSON.stringify({ type: "pong_state", ball: { x: 10, y: 20 } }));
};
```

You should see the structured JSON payload logged in the terminal where Uvicorn is running.

### Pygame Pong

Launch a local Pong battle powered by Pygame. The left paddle uses `W`/`A` to move up and `S`/`D` to move down. The right paddle uses the arrow keys (Up/Left = up, Down/Right = down). Tap `SPACE` to pause/resume, and press `Q` (or close the window) to exit. The ball starts white, takes on the color of the last paddle hit, and scores are shown as `LEFT: N    RIGHT: M`.

```bash
python -m seeking.main --mode pong
```

On boot you'll see a simple in-game menu: press `1` for classic two-player, `2` for human vs AI (right paddle tracks with the current checkpoint), or `3` for AI vs AI. Use the left/right arrows on the menu to cycle the projectile between a ball, square, or triangle—your choice is shown at the top during gameplay. When you choose AI vs AI and close the window, the paddle with the higher score overwrites both checkpoints so the reigning champion is used next time. Press `ESC` to open the pause overlay where you can resume or jump back to the main menu (returning from AI vs AI through this menu will also promote the current winner before showing the menu). By default the human/AI modes look for checkpoints under `runs/green_<shape>.pt` and `runs/purple_<shape>.pt` where `<shape>` is `circle`, `square`, or `triangle`; create those files via `--pong-train`/`--pong-competition` or point the CLI flags elsewhere (`--pong-green-shape`, `--pong-purple-shape`).

#### Training the Pong agent

Flip on the `--pong-train` flag to launch a lightweight REINFORCE trainer that builds a four-layer feed-forward network with two hidden layers (64 and 32 units with ReLU). The model ingests a normalized `(6,)` state vector containing your paddle's top/bottom, the opponent paddle's top/bottom, the current score differential, and the ball's vertical position, and emits unnormalized logits for the two discrete actions (`move_up`, `move_down`). The trainer can run on CPU or GPU (set via `--device`) and saves a standard `state_dict` when `--pong-checkpoint` is provided.

Quick start:

```bash
python -m seeking.main --mode pong --pong-train
```

```bash
python -m seeking.main --mode pong --pong-train --episodes 500 --lr 5e-4 --pong-train-shape square --pong-checkpoint runs/policy_square.pt
```

The saved checkpoint can later be loaded with `torch.load` or plugged into `PongPolicyNetwork.load_state_dict` for experimentation.

To watch the trained policy inside the UI, load the checkpoint with the new demo flag (use `--pong-run-shape` to pick the projectile used during playback):

```bash
python -m seeking.main --mode pong --pong-demo runs/policy_square.pt --pong-run-shape triangle
```

You can also chain training and playback in one go:

```bash
python -m seeking.main --mode pong --pong-train --episodes 500 --pong-train-shape square --pong-checkpoint runs/policy_square.pt --pong-demo runs/policy_square.pt --pong-run-shape triangle
```

Shape-specific AIs: pass `--pong-train-shape square` (or `triangle`) to produce a checkpoint like `runs/policy_square.pt`, and use `--pong-green-shape` / `--pong-purple-shape` to point the UI or competition flow at different shapes when two AIs battle.

#### Competitive loop (train → battle → promote)

If you want both paddles to keep improving through sparring, use the competition flag. Each invocation trains separate green/purple policies, launches a battle UI so they can fight it out, and then copies the winner into both checkpoints before exiting. The next time you run the command, training resumes from the reigning champion.

```bash
python -m seeking.main --mode pong --pong-competition --episodes 500 --pong-green-shape ball --pong-purple-shape square --pong-run-shape triangle
```

Close the UI when you are satisfied with the battle; the score at that moment determines the winner.

Pass `--pong-green-shape` / `--pong-purple-shape` (and rely on the default `runs/green_<shape>.pt` naming, e.g., `green_circle.pt`) to pit differently trained agents against one another, e.g., triangle-vs-square checkpoints.

## Apple Silicon (M1/M2) GPU usage

PyTorch can leverage the Apple GPU via Metal Performance Shaders (MPS). If you installed a recent `torch` wheel, just pass `--device mps` (or set `TORCH_DEVICE=mps`) when running any training command:

```bash
python -m seeking.main --mode pong --pong-train --device mps
```

If you want training/battle commands to automatically attempt the MPS device, we include a helper flag: add `--device auto` and the CLI will try `cuda`, then `mps`, and finally fall back to `cpu`. Use it like so:

```bash
python -m seeking.main --mode pong --device auto --pong-train --pong-train-shape triangle
```

Ensure you have at least Python 3.10 and the official PyTorch builds for macOS arm64 installed.。

E.g.

```bash
python -m seeking.main --mode pong --pong-competition --episodes 500 --pong-green-checkpoint runs/green_circle.pt --pong-purple-checkpoint runs/purple_circle.pt --pong-purple-shape triangle --pong-green-shape triangle --pong-run-shape triangle
```

#### Self-play training inside the UI

To watch two reinforcement learning agents learn directly in the rendered Pong match, start the new self-play mode. Both paddles run identical four-layer feed-forward policies (6 inputs → 64 → 32 → 2) and receive symmetric on-screen rewards (track ball alignment, bounces, and scoring). Parameters such as `--lr`, `--gamma`, `--device`, and `--episodes` still apply, though the self-play loop trains continuously until you quit.

```bash
python -m seeking.main --mode pong --pong-selfplay --lr 1e-3 --gamma 0.99
```

Use `SPACE` to pause/resume and `Q` (or closing the window) to stop the session.

Each time you exit self-play, the latest weights and optimizer state are saved (by default to `pong_selfplay_state.pt`) and automatically reloaded the next time you launch the command. Customize the location with `--pong-selfplay-checkpoint /path/to/file.pt`.

### Running with custom code

Because the project is installed in editable mode, you can import the modules directly:

```python
from seeking.config import GridWorldConfig
from seeking.game.world import GridWor
from seeking.rl.policy import PolicyNetwork
```

This makes it straightforward to embed the environment inside Jupyter notebooks or separate research scripts.

## Extending the playground

- Swap out `GridWorld` for another environment by adding a new module under `seeking/game`.
- Plug in different action or observation spaces by adjusting the dataclass in `config.py`.
- Add agents (scripted policies, planners, etc.) under `seeking/agents` so you can benchmark RL results.
- When training in the cloud, start the CLI with `--mode train --device cuda` to leverage GPUs if available.

## Troubleshooting

- **Arcade cannot open a window**: ensure you run it locally with display access. For SSH sessions, forward X11 or rely on headless training mode.
- **Torch missing CUDA**: specify `--device cpu` if your Python build does not ship GPU support.
- **Dependencies in global Python**: double-check that the virtual environment is activated before installing packages.
